## Propositions

> [!INFO] Definition 1.2.1
> **Proposition:** A sentence that makes either a true or false (but not both) statement.
> 
> Denoted $p$ or $q$, or by another letter if needed.

Propositions are typically denoted $p$, or by another letter if needed. T and F represent TRUE and FALSE respectively.

Examples of **propositions** include "today is monday" and "$1+1=8$" -- the first is TRUE and the second is FALSE, but they are both propositions.

Examples of statements that are *not* **propositions** include "today is a good day" which is ambiguous, and "$x-3=6$", which depends on $x$.

## Negations
> [!INFO] Definition 1.2.2
> **Negation:** The **negation** of $p$ is the proposition "it is not the case that $p$".
> 
> Denoted $\neg p$.

For example, if $p$ is "today is monday", then $\neg p$ is "today is not monday".

This is the logical NOT operator.

## Conjunction and Disjunction
> [!INFO] Definition 1.2.3
> **Conjunction:** The conjunction of $p$ and $q$ is the proposition "p AND q".
> 
> Denoted $p \wedge q$.

This is the logical AND operator, which is true only when both are true:

| $p$ | $q$ | $p \wedge q$ |
|:---:|:---:|:------------:|
|  T  |  T  |      T       |
|  T  |  F  |      F       |
|  F  |  T  |      F       |
|  F  |  F  |      F       |

> [!INFO] Definition 1.2.4
> **Disjunction:** The disjunction of $p$ and $q$ is the proposition "p OR q".
> 
> Denoted $p \vee q$.

This is the logical OR operator, which false only when both are false:

| $p$ | $q$ | $p \vee q$ |
|:---:|:---:|:------------:|
|  T  |  T  |      T       |
|  T  |  F  |      T       |
|  F  |  T  |      T       |
|  F  |  F  |      F       |

> [!INFO] Definition 1.2.5
> **Exclusive OR:** A proposition is true when exactly one of $p$ or $q$ is true.
> 
> Denoted $p \oplus q$, or $p \text{ XOR } q$.

This is the logical XOR operator, which is true if only of  $p$ or $q$ is true:

| $p$ | $q$ | $p \oplus q$ |
|:---:|:---:|:------------:|
|  T  |  T  |      F       |
|  T  |  F  |      T       |
|  F  |  T  |      T       |
|  F  |  F  |      F       |

## Conditionals
> [!INFO] Definition 1.2.6
> **Conditional Statements:** A **Conditional Statement** is an "if-then" statement which implies "if $p$ then $q$"
> 
> Denoted $p \rightarrow q$.

In a **conditional statement**, $p$ is our **hypothesis**, and $q$ is our **conclusion**.

**Conditional Statements** are false when $p$ is true and $q$ is false, and otherwise true:

| $p$ | $q$ | $p \rightarrow q$ |
|:---:|:---:|:------------:|
|  T  |  T  |      T       |
|  T  |  F  |      F       |
|  F  |  T  |      T       |
|  F  |  F  |      T       |

For example, "When I lived in france, I wrote a best selling novel" is a *false* statement because $p$ is false (I never lived in france).

### Biconditionals
> [!INFO] Definition 1.2.7
> **Biconditionals:** A **Biconditional** is a statement written as "$p$ if and only if $q$"
> 
> Denoted $p \leftrightarrow q$, also written "$p$ iff $q$"

**Biconditionals** are true if $p$ and $q$ have the same truth tables, otherwise it is false. In other words, $p \rightarrow q$ and $q \rightarrow p$ must both be true:

| $p$ | $q$ | $p \leftrightarrow q$ |
|:---:|:---:|:------------:|
|  T  |  T  |      T       |
|  T  |  F  |      F       |
|  F  |  T  |      F       |
|  F  |  F  |      T       |

### Contrapositive and Converse
> [!INFO] Definition 1.2.8
> **Contrapositive:** The **Contrapositive** of a statement  $p \rightarrow q$ is "if not $q$, then not $p$".
> 
> This is written as $\neg q \rightarrow \neg p$.
> 
> >[!SUCCESS] Equivalent Statements
> >$p \rightarrow q$ and $\neg q \rightarrow \neg p$ are **equivalent statements**, as they have the same truth table. This is useful later, as we can prove by contrapositive.

> [!INFO] Definition 1.2.9
> **Converse:** The **Converse** of a statement  $p \rightarrow q$ is "$q \rightarrow p$".
> 
> >[!FAILURE] Not Equivalent
> >$p \rightarrow q$ and $q \rightarrow p$ are **not** equivalent statements. It is possible that $p \rightarrow q$ is true while $q \rightarrow p$ is false, and vice versa. Thus, the statements are not equivalent


## Order of Operations
We didn't use this much, but the order of operations for propositional logic is as follows:
$\neg , \ \wedge , \ \vee , \ \rightarrow , \ \leftrightarrow$.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.2.1
>**Determine truth table for $(p \leftrightarrow q) \vee (\neg p \leftrightarrow q)$**.
>
>
| $p$ | $q$ | $\neg p$ | $p \leftrightarrow q$ | $\neg p \leftrightarrow q$ | $(p \leftrightarrow q) \vee (\neg p \leftrightarrow q)$ |
|:---:|:---:|:--------:|:---------------------:|:--------------------------:|:-------------------------------------------------------:|
|  T  |  T  |    F     |           T           |             F              |                            T                            |
|  T  |  F  |    F     |           F           |             T              |                            T                            |
|  F  |  T  |    T     |           F           |             T              |                            T                            |
|  F  |  F  |    T     |           T           |             F              | T                                                        |

## Applications of Propositional Logic
These are a couple worked examples of translating sentances into propositional logic. Note: had I not been absent for a day of this, there would have been more examples.

To solve these problems, identify the propositions within them, and rewrite as propositional logic.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.2.2
>**Translare the following into propositional logic.**
>
>1. You can graduate only if you have completed the requirements of your major and you do not owe any money to the college and you do not have any overdue library books.
>	- $g=$ "you can graduate"
>	- $c=$ "you completed the requirements of your major"
>	- $m=$ "you owe money to the college"
>	- $b=$ "you do not have any overdue library books"
>	- $g \rightarrow (c \wedge \neg m \wedge b)$
>
>2. You are eligible to be president of the USA only if you are at least 35 years old, were born in the USA or your birth parents were US citizens, and you have lived in the country at least 14 years.
>	- $p=$ "you are eligible to be president of the USA"
>	- $a=$ "you are at least 35 years old"
>	- $b=$ "you were born in the USA"
>	- $c=$ "your birth parents were US citizens"
>	- $d=$ "you have lived in the country at least 14 years"
>	- $p \rightarrow a \wedge (b \vee c) \wedge d$


## More Examples

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.2.3
>**Negate.**
>
>1. Linda is younger than Sanjay
>	- Linda is not younger than Sanjay
>	- Linda is older / the same age as Sanjay
>
>2. Mei makes more money than Isabella
>	- Mei does not make more money than Isabella
>	- It is not the case that Mei makes more money than Isabella
>	- Mei makes less / the same as Isabella

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.2.4
>**Let $p=$ "the election is decided", and $q=$ "the votes are counted".**
>
>1. $\neg p=$ "the election is not decided"
>2. $q \rightarrow p=$ "if the votes are counted, then the election is decided"
>3. $\neg p \rightarrow \neg q=$ "if the election is not decided, then the votes are not counted"
>4. $p \vee q=$ "the election is decided or the votes are counted"
>5. $p \leftrightarrow q=$ "the election is decided if and only if the votes are counted"

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.2.5
>**Let $p=$ "bears have been seen in this area", $q=$ "hiking is safe on the trail", $r=$ "berries are ripe on the trail".**
>
>1. Berries are ripe along the trail but bears have been seen in the area.
> 	- $r \wedge \neg p$
> 
>2. Bears have not been seen in the area and hiking is safe on the trail, but berries are ripe.
>	- $\neg p \wedge q \wedge r$
>
>3. Hiking is not safe when bears have been seen and berries are ripe.
>	- This can be rewritten as "If bears have been seen and berries are ripe, the hiking is not safe".
>	- $(p \wedge r) \rightarrow \neg q$
>
>4. It is not safe to hike but bears have not been seen and berries are ripe.
>	- $\neg q \wedge \neg p \wedge r$
>
>5. For hiking to be safe, it is necessary but not sufficient that berries not be ripe and bears have not been seen.
>	- "Necessary but not sufficient" means "*Necessary* and *not sufficient*", so we start by determining what those are.
>	- Necessary: $q \rightarrow (\neg p \wedge \neg r)$
>	- Sufficient: $(\neg p \wedge \neg r) \rightarrow q$
>	- Not Sufficient: $\neg ((\neg p \wedge \neg r) \rightarrow q)$
>	- Necessary but Not Sufficient: $(q \rightarrow (\neg p \wedge \neg r)) \wedge (\neg ((\neg p \wedge \neg r) \rightarrow q))$

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.2.6
>**Determine if the following are true.**
>
>1. $2+2=4$ iff $1+1=2$.
>	- Both true, **T**
>
>2. $1+1=3$ iff monkeys can fly
>	- Both false, **F**
>
>3. If $1+1=3$, then $2+2=5$
>	- The hypothesis is false, so the statement is true, **T**
>
>4. If $1+1=2$, then $2+2=5$
>	- Hypothesis is true but conclusion is false, **F**
>
>5. If $1+1=2$, then dogs can fly
>	- **F**
>
>6. $1+1=2$ iff $2+3=4$
>	- **F**
>
>7. $1+1=3$ iff $2+3=4$
>	- **T**

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.2.7
>**Determine if inclusive or exclusive or.**
>
>1. A password must have at least 3 digits or be at least 8 chars long.
>	- Inclusive
>
>2. You can pay using dollars or euros.
>	- Exclusive
>
>3. Coffee or tea comes with dinner.
>	- Exclusive
>
>4. The prerequisite for a course is Math 212 or Math 214.
>	- Inclusive

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.2.8
>**Rewrite as "if-then" statements.**
>
>1. Jan will go swimming unless the water is too cold.
>	- If the water is not too cold, then Jan will go swimming.
>
>2. It is necessary to have a valid password to log in to the server.
>	- If you logged into the server, then you have a valid password.
>
>3. Will gets caught whenever he cheats.
>	- If Will cheats, then he gets caught.
>
>4. To get tenure as a professor it is sufficient to be world famous.
>	- If a professor is world famous, then they will get tenure.
>
>5. The beach erodes whenever there is a storm.
>	- If there is a storm, then the beach erodes

