>[!INFO] Important Definitions
>**Even:** $n$ is **even** if $n = 2k$ for some $k \in \mathbb{Z}$.
>**Odd:** $n$ is **odd** if $n = 2k + 1$ for some $k \in \mathbb{Z}$.

When writing proofs, it is important to remember to do scrapwork, and not just jump into the proof immediately. Take your time and think it through!

## Direct Proof
**Direct Proofs** start with the hypothesis, and use known theorems and definitions to prove the conclusion.
>[!TIP] To prove $p \rightarrow q$, we assume $p$ is true, and show $q$ is true.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.4.1
>**The product of an even integer and an odd integer is an even integer.**
>
>*Proof:* Let $m$ be an even integer and $n$ be an odd integer. By definition, there exists an integer $k$ such that $m = 2k$ and an integer $l$ so that $n = 2l + 1$. We have $mn = (2k)(2k + 1) = 2(2kl + k)$. Since $2kl+k$ is an integer, $mn$ is even by definition. $\square$

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.4.2
>**If $n$ is an integer and $3n + 2$ is odd, then $n$ is odd.**
>
>*Proof:* Let $n$ be an integer and assume $3n + 2$ is odd. By definition, there exists an integer $k$ so that $3n + 2 = 2k + 1$. We can rewrite $3n + 2$ as $n + 2n + 2 = n + 2(n+1)$, so we have $n + 2(n+1) = 2k + 1$. In other words, $n = 2k + 1 - 2(n+1) = 2(k - n - 1) +  1$. This gives us $n$ odd. $\square$

## Proof by Contrapositive
We want to show $p \rightarrow q$ by proving its equivalent contrapositive $\neg q \rightarrow \neg p$.
>[!TIP] To prove $\neg q \rightarrow \neg p$, we assume $\neg q$ is true, and show $\neg p$ is true.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.4.3
>**If $n$ is an integer and $3n + 2$ is odd, then $n$ is odd.**
>(Same setup as last problem, but this time we prove by contrapositive)
>
>*Proof:* Assume $n$ is an even integer ($\neg q$). We can write $n = 2k$ for some integer $k$. This gives us $3n + 2 = 3(2k) + 2 = 2(3k + 1)$. Since $3k+1$ is an integer, $3n + 2$ is even. $\square$ 

Often, the same problem can be proved in multiple ways! As the last problem shows, we can prove it directly or by contrapositive. However, it is clear that the contrapositive proof is faster in this case.

## Proof by Contradiction
We want to show $p \rightarrow q$ by finding a contraditiction with $\neg p$.
>[!TIP] To prove, we assume $\neg p$ true, and argue until we find $\neg p$ false.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.4.4
>**If $n$ is an integer and $n^{3}+5$ is odd, then $n$ is even.**
>
>*Proof:* Assume $n^{3}+5$ is odd and $n$ is odd. There exists an integer $k$ so that $n = 2k+1$. We have $n^{3}+5=(2k+1)^{3}+5=8k^{3}+12k^{2}+6k+1+5=2(4k^3+6k^2+3k+3)$. This result is even, which **contradicts** the fact that $n^{3}+5$ is assumed odd, so it must be the case that $n$ is even. $\square$

## More Examples
Scrapwork for some of these problems is in the notebook, but most of it is not needed here.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.4.5
>**Prove the product of 2 odd numbers is odd.**
>
>*Proof:* Let $m, n \in \mathbb{Z}$ be odd. There exists $k,l \in \mathbb{Z}$ so that $m = 2k + 1$ and $n = 2l+1$. We have $mn = (2k+1)(2l+1) = 4kl+2k+2l+1 = 2(2kl + k + l) + 1$. Since $2kl+k+l \in \mathbb{Z}$, we have $mn$ as desired. $\square$

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.4.6
>**Prove that every odd integer is the difference of two squares**
>
>*Scrapwork:* $1 = 2(0) + 1 = 1^2-0^2$, $3 = 2(1) + 1= 2^2-1^2$, $5 = 2(2) + 1= 3^2-2^2$. Observe $2k+1 = (k+1)^{2}-k^{2} = k^{2}+ 2k + 1 - k^{2}= 2k+1$.
>
>*Proof:* Let $m$ be an odd integer. We can write $m=2k+1$ for some $k \in \mathbb{Z}$. Observe $2k+1 = (k+1)^2-k^2$. $\square$ 

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.4.7
>**Prove that the sum of two even integers is even.**
>
>*Proof:* Let $m, n \in \mathbb{Z}$ be even. There exists $k, l \in \mathbb{Z}$ so that $m = 2k$ and $n = 2l$. We have $m+n = 2k + 2l = 2(k+l)$. Because $k+l \in \mathbb{Z}$, we have $m+n$ is even. $\square$

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.4.8
>**Prove that the product of two rational numbers is rational.**
>
>*Proof:* Let $m,n$ be rational numbers. There exist $a,b,c,d \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $m = \frac{a}{b}$ and $n = \frac{c}{d}$. We have $mn = \frac{ab}{cd}$. Since $\frac{ab}{cd} \in \mathbb{Q}$, we have $mn$ is rational. $\square$

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.4.9
>**Prove that there are not integers $x, y$ so that $2x+4y=1$.**
>
>*Scrapwork:* This looks like a contradiction proof.
>
>*Proof:* Assume there exists $x, y \in \mathbb{Z}$ so that $2x+4y=1$. This gives $2(x+2y) = 1$. We have $x+2y \in \mathbb{Z}$. Since $x+2y=\frac{1}{2}$, this gives $\frac{1}{2} \in \mathbb{Z}$, which is not possible. This is a contradiction, so it must be the case that there are no integers $x, y$ with $2x+4y = 1$. $\square$

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.4.10
>**Prove that if $n$ is a perfect square, then $n+2$ is not a perfect square.**
>
>*Proof:* Let $n \in \mathbb{Z}$ be a perfect square. So, there exists $k \in \mathbb{Z}$ so that $n=k^2$. Assume $n+2$ is a perfect square. There exists $l \in \mathbb{Z}$ with $n+2 = l^2$. We have $k^2+2=l^2$, i.e., $2=l^2-k^2=(l-k)(l+k)$. Since $l-k, l+k \in \mathbb{Z}$ and $(l-k)(l+k)=2$, we have $l-k= \pm 1,\ l+k= \pm 2$, or $l-k= \pm 2,\ l+k= \pm 1$. Thus, $(l-k)+(l+k)= \pm 3$. However $(l-k)+(l+k)=2l$. So, $2l = \pm 3$, i.e., $l = \pm \frac{3}{2}$. But $l \in \mathbb{Z}$, so this is a contradiction. Hence, $n+2$ cannot be a perfect square if $n$ is a perfect square. $\square$

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.4.11
>**Prove that the sum of an irrational number and a rational number is irrational.**
>
>*Proof:* Let $z$ be an irrational number and $\frac{a}{b} \in \mathbb{Q}$. Assume $z+\frac{a}{b} = \frac{c}{d} \in \mathbb{Q}$, i.e., there exists $\frac{c}{d} \in \mathbb{Q}$ with $z+\frac{a}{b}=\frac{c}{d}$. We have $z=\frac{c}{d}-\frac{a}{b}=\frac{cb-ad}{bd} \in \mathbb{Q}$. But $z \notin \mathbb{Q}$, so this is a contradiction. Thus, $z+\frac{a}{b}$ is irrational. $\square$

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.4.12
>**Prove that if $m^2$ is even, then $m$ is even.**
>
>*Proof:* Assume $m \in \mathbb{Z}$ with $m^2$ even, but $m$ is odd. Since $m$ is odd, we can write $m = 2k+1$ for some $k \in \mathbb{Z}$. We have $m^2=(2k+1)^2=4k^2+4k+1=2(2k^2+2k)+1$. This shows that if $m$ is odd, then $m^2$ is odd. This contradicts our assumption, thus if $m^2$ is even, $m$ is even. $\square$

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.4.13
>**Prove that if $x, y, z \in \mathbb{Z}$ and $x+y+z$ is odd, then at least one of $x, y, z$ is odd.**
>
>*Proof:* Let $x, y, z \in \mathbb{Z}$ and assume $x, y, z$ are even. There exists $a,b,c \in \mathbb{Z}$ so that $x=2a,\ y=2b,\ z=2c$. We have $x+y+z=2a+2b+2c=2(a+b+c)$. Thus, $x+y+z$ is even if $x,y,z$ are all even. Therefore, by contrapositive, $x+y+z$ is odd if at least one of $x,y,z$ is odd. $\square$

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.4.14
>**Let $x \in \mathbb{Z}$. Prove if $x^{2}-6x+5$ is even, then $x$ is odd.**
>
>*Proof:* Let $x \in \mathbb{Z}$ and assume $x$ is even. There exists $k \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $x=2k$. We have $x^{2}-6x+5=(2k)^{2}-6(2k)+5=2(2k^{2}-6k+2)+1$. Thus, $x^{2}-6x+5$ is odd if $x$ is even. Therefore, by contrapositive, $x$ is odd if $x^{2}-6x+5$ is even. $\square$

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.4.15
>**Let $x,y \in \mathbb{Z}$. If $5 \nmid xy$, then $5 \nmid x$ and $5 \nmid y$.**
>
>*Proof:* Let $x,y \in \mathbb{Z}$ and assume $5|x$ or $5|y$. **Without loss of generality (WLOG)**, assume $5|x$. There exists $k \in \mathbb{Z}$ so that $x=5k$. We have $xy=(5k)y=5(ky)$. Thus, $5|xy$. Therefore, by contrapositive, if $5 \nmid xy$, then $5 \nmid x$ and $5 \nmid y$. $\square$
>
>>[!SUCCESS] Without Loss Of Generality
>>WLOG is used here because, functionally, $x$ and $y$ are the same: working the proof through with $x$ and $y$ produce the same exact result, and thus we can use WLOG to say that it is the same either way.

## Biconditional Proofs
To prove a biconditional, you must prove it in *both* directions.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.4.16
>**Prove that if $n \in \mathbb{Z_{>0}}$, then $n$ is even iff $7n+4$ is even.**
>
>*Proof:*
>	"$\Rightarrow$" Assume $n$ is even and $n \in \mathbb{Z_{>0}}$. There exists $x \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $n=2k$. We have $7n+4=7(2k)+4=14k+4=2(7k+2)$. Thus, if $n$ is even, then $7n+4$ is even.
>	"$\Leftarrow$" (contrapositive) Assume $n$ is odd and $n \in \mathbb{Z_{>0}}$. There exists $k \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $n=2k+1$. We have $7n+4=7(2k+1)+4=14k+7+4=14k+10+1=2(7k+5)+1$. Thus if $n$ is odd, then $7n+4$ is odd. By contrapositive, If $7n+4$ is even, then $n$ is even. $\square$

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.4.17
>**Prove that if $n \in \mathbb{Z_{>0}}$, then $n$ is odd iff $5n+6$ is odd.**
>
>*Proof:*
>	"$\Rightarrow$" Assume $n$ is odd and $n \in \mathbb{Z_{>0}}$. There exists $k \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $n = 2k+1$. We have: $$\begin{align*}
>	5n+6 &= 5(2k+1) + 6\\
>	     &= 10k+5+6\\
>	     &= 10k+10+1\\
>	     &= 2(5k + 5)+1.
>	\end{align*}$$ Thus, if $n$ is odd, then $5n+6$ is odd.
>	"$\Leftarrow$" (contrapositive) Assume $n$ is even and $n \in \mathbb{Z_{>0}}$. There exists $k \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $n = 2k$. We have: $$\begin{align*}
>	5n+6 &= 5(2k) + 6\\
>	     &= 10k+6\\
>	     &= 2(5k+3).
>	\end{align*}$$ Thus, if $n$ is even, then $5n+6$ is even. Therefore, by contrapositive, if $5n+6$ is odd, then $n$ is odd.





