Suppose I want to eat an entire bag of chips. I know two things:
1. I can eat once chip.
2. If I've eaten one chip, I can eat one more.
The first statement meatns I can eat one, the second statement means I can eat a second, third, fourth, etc.

**Proof by Induction** has you get to the point where you can always go one step further.
>[!QUESTION] What are the steps for Induction?
>To prove that $P(n)$ is true for all positive integers $n$, where $P(n)$ is a propositional function, we need 2 steps:
>1. Base Case: Verify $P(1)$ true (or whatever lowest $P$ needed is).
>2. Inductive Hypothesis: Show that $P(k)$ implies $P(k+1)$ true for all positive integers $n$.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.5.1
>**Let $P(n)$ be $n^{2}\geq n$. Use induction to prove $P(n)$ for all positive integers $n$.**
>
>*Base Case:*
>	$P(1)$ is $1^{2}\geq 1$, which is true.
>
>*Inductive Hypothesis:*
>	Assume that $P(k)$ is true for some $k \in \mathbb{Z}$, i.e., $k^{2}\geq k$. This is our **inductive hypothesis**. We want to show that $P(k+1)$ is true, i.e., $(k+1)^{2}\geq k+1$. We have: $$\begin{align*}
>	(k+1)^{2} &= k^{2}+2k+1\\
>	          &\geq k+2k+1 = 3k+1 \geq k+1.
>	\end{align*}$$
>	Thus, we have shown $P(k)$ and $P(k+1)$ true. Therefore, $P(n)$ is ture for all positive integers by mathematical induction. $\square$

It is important to note that we must assume $P(k)$ true for *some* (not all!) $k$. If we assume true for all, then we don't have anything left to prove, and we haven't proven anything. By assuming true for *some*, we can use induction to show that it's true for all.

>[!TIP] All inductive hypotheses start with the sentence: "Assume that $P(k)$ is true for some $k \in \mathbb{Z}$".

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.5.2
>**Let $P(n)$ be $1+x+x^2+\cdots+x^{n}=\frac{1-x^{n+1}}{1-x}$ for $x \neq 1$. Prove $P(n)$ by induction for all positive integers $n$.**
>
>*Base Case:*
>	$P(1)$ is $1+x=\frac{1-x^{2}}{1-x}$ for $x\neq 1$. We have $1-x^{2}=(1-x)(1+x)$, so $\frac{1-x^{2}}{1-x}=1+x$ for $x \neq 1$. Thus, $P(1)$ true.
>
>*Inductive Hypothesis:*
>	Assume that $P(k)$ is true for some $k \in \mathbb{Z}$, i.e., $1+x+x^2+\cdots+x^{k}=\frac{1-x^{k+1}}{1-x}$ for $x \neq 1$. We have: $$\begin{align*}
>		1+x+x^{2}+\cdots+x^{k}+x^{x+1} &= (1+x+x^{2}+\cdots+x^k)+x^{k+1}\\
>		&= \frac{1-x^{k+1}}{1-x} + x^{k+1} \text{ (by induction hyp.)}\\
>		&= \frac{1-x^{k+1}}{1-x} + \frac{x^{k+1}(1-x)}{1-x}\\
>		&= \frac{1-x^{k+1}+x^{k+1}-x^k+2}{1-x}\\
>		&= \frac{1-x^{k+2}}{1-x} \text{ for } x\neq 1.
>	\end{align*}$$
>	Thus, we have shown that if $P(k)$ is true, $P(k+1)$ must also be true. Therefore, $P(n)$ is true for all positive integers $n$ by mathematical induction. $\square$

## More Examples
>[!TIP] $P(n)$ is the *whole* given statement, not just one side!

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.5.3
>**Prove that for every $n \in \mathbb{Z_{\geq 1}}$, $(1*2) + (2*3) + \cdots + n(n+1) = \frac{n(n+1)(n+2)}{3}$**
>
>*Proof:* Let $P(n)$ be the statement $(1*2) + (2*3) + \cdots + n(n+1) = \frac{n(n+1)(n+2)}{3}$.
>
>*Base Case:*
>	We want to show that $P(1)$ is a true statement. On the left side, we have $1*2=2$, and on the right side $\frac{1*2*3}{3}=2$. So $P(1)$ is a true statement.
>
>*Inductive Hypothesis:* 
>Assume $P(k)$ is true for some $k \in \mathbb{Z_{\geq 1}}$, i.e., $(1*2) + (2*3) + \cdots + k(k+1) = \frac{k(k+1)(k+2)}{3}$. We want to prove that $P(k+1)$ is a true statement. By our induction hypothesis, we have: $$\begin{align*}
>	(1*2)+(2*3)+\cdots+k(k+1) &= \frac{k(k+1)(k+2)}{3} + (k+1)(k+2)\\
>	&= \frac{k(k+1)(k+2)}{3} + \frac{3(k+1)(k+2)}{3}\\
>	&= \frac{k(k+1)(k+2)+3(k+1)(k+2)}{3}\\
>	&= \frac{(k+1)(k+2)(k+3)}{3}.
>	\end{align*}$$ Thus, if $P(k)$ is true, then $P(k+1)$ is true. $\square$

We don't need to include the fully written out $P(k+1)$ (what we're looking for) in the inductive step, but it can be helpful. This wasn't done in the previous example, but it will be done in the next one.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.5.4
>**Prove $1+2+3 + \cdots +n = \frac{n(n+1)}{2}$ for $n\geq 1$**
>
>*Proof:* Let $P(n)$ be the statement $1+2+3 + \cdots +n = \frac{n(n+1)}{2}$ for $n \in \mathbb{Z_{\geq 1}}$.
>
>*Base Case:*
>	We want to show that $P(1)$ is a true statement. On the left side, we have $1=1$, and on the right side $\frac{1*2}{2}=1$. Thus, $P(1)$ is a true statement.
>
>*Inductive Hypothesis:* 
>Assume $P(k)$ is true for some $k \in \mathbb{Z_{\geq 1}}$, i.e., $1+2+3 + \cdots +k = \frac{k(k+1)}{2}$. We want to prove that $P(k+1)$ is a true statement, i.e., $P(k+1)=\frac{(k+1)(k+2)}{2}$. By our induction hypothesis, we have: $$\begin{align*}
>	1+2+3 + \cdots +k+(k+1) &= \frac{k(k+1)}{2} + (k+1)\\
>	&= \frac{k(k+1)}{2} + \frac{2(k+1)}{2}\\
>	&= \frac{k(k+1)+2(k+1)}{2}\\
>	&= \frac{(k+1)(k+2)}{2}.
>	\end{align*}$$ Thus, if $P(k)$ is true, then $P(k+1)$ is true. $\square$

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.5.5
>**Prove $2^{n}>n^{2}$ for all $n \in \mathbb{Z_{>4}}$.**
>
>*Proof:* Let $P(n)$ be the statement $2^{n}>n^{2}$ for all $n \in \mathbb{Z_{>4}}$.
>
>*Base Case:*
>	We want to show $P(5)$ is true. Observe $2^{5}>5^{2}$. Thus, $P(5)$ is a true statement.
>	
>*Inductive Hypothesis:* 
>Assume $P(k)$ true for some $k \in \mathbb{Z_{>4}}$, i.e., $2^{k}>k^{2}$. We want to show $P(k+1)$ is true, i.e., $2^{k+1}>(k+1)^{2}$. By our inductive hypothesis, we have $2^{k+1}=2*2^{k}>2*k^{2}$. We have: $$\begin{align*}
>	2*k^{2} &= k^{2}+k^{2}\\
>	        &> k^{2}+4k = k^{2}+2k+2k\\
>	        &> k^{2}+2k+1 = (k+1)^2.
>	\end{align*}$$
>	Thus, $2^{k+1}>(k+1)^{2}$. Therefore, if $P(k)$ is true, then $P(k+1)$ is true. Hence,  $P(n)$ is ture for all $n \in \mathbb{Z_{>4}}$ by induction. $\square$

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.5.6
>**Prove that $n! < n^{n}$ for all $n \in \mathbb{Z_{> 1}}$.**
>
>*Proof:* Let $P(n)$ be the statement $n! > n^{n}$ for all $n \in \mathbb{Z_{> 1}}$.
>
>*Base Case:* 
>We want to show $P(2)$ is a true statement. On the left side, we have $2!=2$. On the right side, we have $2^{2}=4$. Because $2<4$, $P(2)$ is true.
>
>*Inductive Hypothesis:*
>Assume $P(k)$ is true for some $k \in \mathbb{Z}$, i.e., $k! < k^k$. We want to show that $P(k+1)$ is a true statement, i.e., $(k+1)! < (k+1)^{k+1}$. We have $(k+1)! = (k+1)k! < (k+1)k^{k}$ by our induction hypothesis. Continuing, we have $(k+1)k!<(k+1)(k+1)^{k}$ because $k<k+1$. Therefore, $(k+1)!<(k+1)^{k+1}$. Thus, $P(k+1)$ is true if $P(k)$ is true. Hence, $P(n)$ is true for all $n \in \mathbb{Z_{> 1}}$ by induction. $\square$

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 1.5.7
>**Prove that 3 divides $n^{3}+2n$ for all $n \in \mathbb{Z_{\geq 1}}$.**
>
>*Proof:* Let $P(n)$ be the statement $3$ divides $n^{3}+2n$ for all $n \in \mathbb{Z_{\geq 1}}$.
>
>*Base Case:*
>The statement $P(1)$ says $3|(1^{3}+2(1))$, i.e., $3|3$, which is true.
>
>*Inductive Hypothesis:*
>Assume $P(k)$ true for some $k \in \mathbb{Z}$, i.e., there exists $m \in \mathbb{Z}$ with $k^{3}+2k=3m$. We want to prove $P(k+1)$ true. We have: $$\begin{align*}
>	(k+1)^{3}+2(k+1) &= k^{3}+3k^{2}+5k+3\\
>	                 &= k^{3}+2k+3k^{2}+3k+3\\
>					 &= (k^{3}+2k)+3(k^{2}+k+1).
>	\end{align*}$$
>By our induction hypothesis, we have: $$\begin{align*}
>	(k^{3}+2k)+3(k^{2}+k+1) &= 3m + 3(k^{2}+k+1)\\
>	&= 3(m+k^{2}+k+1).
>	\end{align*}$$
>Because $(m+k^{2}+k+1) \in \mathbb{Z}$, this is true. Thus, $P(k+1)$ is true if $P(k)$ is true. Hence, $P(n)$ is true for all $n \in \mathbb{Z_{\geq 1}}$ by induction.

