## Sets
>[!INFO] Definition 2.1.1
> **Set:** an unordered collection of distinct objects. Objects are called **members** or **elements**, and a set **contains** them.
> 

Given a set $A$, we write $a \in A$ to denote $a$ is a member of $A$. On the contrary, $a \notin A$ indicates that $a$ is not a member of $A$.

>[!QUESTION] What are the most common sets?
>	- $\mathbb{N} = \{0,1,2,3,\dots\}$: Natural Numbers
>	- $\mathbb{Z} = \{\dots , -2,-1,0,1,2,\dots\}$: Integers
>	- $\mathbb{Q} = \{a|b : a,b \in \mathbb{Z}, b \neq 0\}$: Rational Numbers
>	- $\mathbb{R}$: Real numbers
>Note that the Rational and Real numbers are not discrete sets.

## Equivalence and Subsets
### Equivalence
>[!INFO] Definition 2.1.2
>**Equal:** Two sets are **equal** if they contain all of the same numbers.
>
>Denoted $A=B$.

### Subsets
>[!INFO] Definition 2.1.3
>**Subset:** Let $A,B$ be sets. $A$ is a **subset** of $B$ if all elements of $A$ are elements of $B$.
>
>Denoted $A \subseteq B$.

To show $A \subseteq B$, we must take an arbitrary element of $A$ and show that it is also an element of $B$.
	Ex: To show $\mathbb{Z} \subseteq \mathbb{Q}$, let $m \in \mathbb{Z}$. We have $m = m|1 \in \mathbb{Q}$, so $m \in \mathbb{Q}$. Therefore, every element of $\mathbb{Z}$ is in $\mathbb{Q}$.

>[!TIP] To prove two sets equal, we must prove that both sets are subsets of each other.

### The Empty Set
>[!INFO] Definition 2.1.4
>**Empty Set:** The set with no elements.
>
>Denoted $\emptyset$.

For every set $A$, $\emptyset \subseteq A$. We can prove this by taking $x \in \emptyset$ implies $x \in A$.

## Properties
### Cardinality
>[!INFO] Definition 2.1.5
>**Cardinality:** Let $A$ be a set. If $A$ consists of $n$ distinct elemetns for some $n \in \mathbb{N}$, we say $A$ is a **finite set** with **cardinality** $n$.
>
>Denoted $|A|$ or $\#A$.

Though in this class we look at sets of numbers, sets can theoretically contain any information.
	Ex: $A=\{3,-49,2,apple,mountain\}$, we have $|A|=5$ .

If $A$ is not a **finite set**, then it is an **Infinite Set**.
	$\mathbb{Z}$ and $\mathbb{R}$ are examples of infinite sets.

### Power Sets
>[!INFO] Definition 2.1.6
>**Power Set:** The **Power Set** of $A$ is the set of all subsets of $A$.
>
>Denoted $\mathcal{P}(A)$.

For example, if $A = \{a,b,c\}$, then $\mathcal{P}(A) = \{\emptyset, \{a\}, \{b\}, \{c\}, \{a,b\}, \{a,c\}, \{b,c\}, A\}$.

>[!TIP] If $A$ contains $n$ elements, then $\#\mathcal{P}(A)=2^{n}$.

### Tuples
>[!INFO] Definition 2.1.7
>**Ordered n-tuple:** Let $n \in \mathbb{N}$ with $n>0$. An **ordered n-tuple** $(a_{1},a_{2},\dots , a_{n})$ is an ordered collection where $a_{1}$ is the first element, $a_{2}$ is the second, etc.

### Cartesian Products
>[!INFO] Definition 2.1.8
>**Cartesian Products:** Let $A,B$ be sets. The **Cartesian Product** of $A$ and $B$ is the set of all ordered pairs $(a, b)$ with $a \in A$ and $b \in B$.
>
>Denoted $A \times B$.

For ecample, let $A = \{1,2\}$ and $B = \{x, y\}$. The **Cartesian Product** can be written $A \times B = \{(1,x),(1,y),(2,x),(2,y)\}$.

The Cartesian Plane, also commonly known as the xy-plane, is the **Cartesian Product** of the real numbers $\mathbb{R} \times \mathbb{R}$.

>[!TIP] $\mathbb{R} \times \mathbb{R} = \mathbb{R}^{2}$. This notation can be applied to any set crossed with itself.

## More Examples
>[!EXAMPLE] Example 2.1.1
>**List the elements in the set $\{x: x\in \mathbb{Z}, x even, x>0, x<12\}$.**
>
>$=\{2,4,6,8,10\}$

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 2.1.2
>**Consider the intervals $(10,11),\ [10,11),\ (10,11],\ [10,10],\ (10,10)$.**
>1. Which contain $10$?
>	- $[10,11),\ [10,10]$
>
>2. Which contain $11$?
>	- $(10,11]$
>
>3. Which are empty?
>	- $(10,10)$

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 2.1.3
>**Determine which is a subset of the other, or if neither is a subset**
>1. $A=\{$students taking classes at Oxy$\}, B=\{$students taking college classes$\}$.
>	- $A \subseteq B$
>
>2. $A=\{$birds that live in California$\}, B=\{$blue jays$\}$.
>	- There is no containment here, but it is possible that there still could be overlap.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 2.1.4
>**Let $A \subseteq B$ and $B \subseteq C$. Prove $A \subseteq C$.**
>
>*Proof:* Let $a \in A$. Since $A \subseteq B$, we have $a \in B$. However, since $a \in B$ and $B \subseteq C$, this shows that $a \in C$. Thus, $A \subseteq C$. $\square$

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 2.1.5
>**Prove if $A \subseteq B$ and $C \subseteq D$, then $A \times C \subseteq B \times D$.**
>
>Let $(a,c) \in A \times C$. We know that $a \in A$ and $A \subseteq B$, so $a \in B$. Similarly $c \in C$ and $C \subseteq D$, so $c \in D$. Thus, $(a,c) \in B \times D$. Hence, $A \times C \subseteq B \times D$. $\square$
