## Primes
>[!INFO] Definition 3.2.1
>**Prime:** Let $p \in \mathbb{Z}$. $p$ is **prime** if the only positive divisors of $p$ are $1$ and $p$.

If an integer greater than 1 is not prime, it is **composite**.

>[!ABSTRACT] Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic
>**Every integer $>1$ has a unique factor of primes.**

This is something likely seen first in elementary school. For example, $12 = 2^{2} \cdot 3$. However, for increasingly large numbers, factoring into primes becomes much more difficult, if not just time consuming and tedious.

>[!ABSTRACT] Theorem
>**There are infinitely many primes.**
>
>>[!EXAMPLE] Proof:
>>Assume there are finitely many primes $P=\{p_{1},p_{2},\dots,p_{n}\}$. Set $N=p_{1}\cdot p_{2}\cdot \dots \cdot p_{n}+1$. The Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic says that this has a prime factorization; in particular, there is a prime that divides $N$. Thus, for some $p_{j} \in P$ with $1 \leq j \leq n$, we have $p_{j}|N$. We also have $p_{j}|p_{1}\cdot p_{2}\cdot \dots \cdot p_{n}$. But then, $p_{j}$ must divide $N - p_{1}\cdot p_{2}\cdot \dots \cdot p_{n}$, so $p_{j}|1$. This is a contradiction. Therefore, there are infinitely many primes. $\square$

The following within this section was never addressed in depth, but is interesting nonetheless.

It is not easy to count how many primes there are less than a given number $x$.
>[!ABSTRACT] Prime Number Theorem
>$\lim_{x\to\infty}\frac{\pi(x)}{x/(ln(x))}=1$
>
>The notation $\pi(x)$ refers to the number of primes less than $x$.


| $x$    | $\pi(x)$     | $x/(ln(x))$    | $\frac{\pi(x)}{x/(ln(x))}$ |
| ------ | ------------ | -------------- | -------------------------- |
| $10^3$ | $168$        | $144.8$        | $1.161$                    |
| $10^5$ | $9589$       | $8685.9$       | $1.104$                    |
| $10^7$ | $664,579$    | $620,470.7$    | $1.071$                    |
| $10^9$ | $50,847,574$ | $48,254,942.4$ | $1.054$                           |


>[!ABSTRACT] Goldbach's Conjecture
>**Let $n\in \mathbb{Z},\ n > 2$. $n$ can be written as $n=p+q$ for $p,q$ prime numbers.**

Originally conjectured in 1742, this still has yet to be formally proven. Currently, it is known true for $n<4 \times 10^{18}$ and for $n = p_{1}+p_{2}+p_{3}+p_{4}$ (for $p_{j}$ prime).

>[!ABSTRACT] Twin Prime Conjecture
>**There are infinitely many primes $p$ so that $p+2$ is also prime.**
>
>In other words, there are infinitely many prime pairs $(p,q)$ so that $p-q=2$ 

For example, we can look at $(3,5)$, $(11,13)$, $(5,7)$, etc.

Originally conjectured around 1800, this still has yet to be formally proven. Around 2013, however, it was shown that there are infinitely many prime pairs with $q-p \leq 246$.

## Greatest Common Divisor
>[!INFO] Definition 3.2.2
>**Greatest Common Divisor (GCD):** Let $a,b,c \in \mathbb{Z}$ with $a$ and $b$ not both $0$. We say $d$ is the **greatest common divisor** of $a,b$ and write **$d=gcd(a,b)$** if $d|a$ and $d|b$, and if $e|a$ and $e|b$, then $e \leq d$.
>
>This is the formal definition, but in short, the **GCD** is the largest number that divides both $a$ and $b$.

For example, if $a=27$ and $b=36$, then $gcd(27,36)=d=9$.

>[!TIP] If $gcd(a,b)=1$, $a$ and $b$ are Relatively Prime.

## Linear Combinations and the Euclidean Algorithm
>[!ABSTRACT] Euclidean Theorem
>**Let $a,b,c,d \in \mathbb{Z}$, and let $a = bq+r$. The theorem states that $gcd(a,b)=gcd(b,r)$.**
>
>>[!EXAMPLE] Proof
>>Let $d|a$ and $d|b$. There exists $m,n \in \mathbb{Z}$ so that $a=dm$ and $b=dn$. We have $r=a-bq=(dm)-(dn)q=d(m-nq)$. Thus, $d|r$. This means that any common divisor of $a$ and $b$ is a common divisor of $b$ and $r$. Similarly, let $e|a$ and $e|r$. There exists $s,t \in \mathbb{Z}$ so that $b=es$ and $r=et$. We have $a=b+qr=(es)q+(et)=e(sq+t)$. Thus, $e|a$. This means that any common divisor of $b$ and $r$ is a common divisor of $a$ and $b$. Since the pair $\{a,b\}$ and the pair $\{b,r\}$ have the same common factors, they have the same greatest common factor/divisor. $\square$

We use this theorem as the **Euclidean Algorithm**, which finds the GCD of two numbers by taking smaller and smaller GCDs.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 3.2.2
>**Let $a=1331$ and $b=1001$. Compute the GCD using the Euclidean Algorithm.**
>
>We start with $gcd(1331,1001)$:
>$1331 = 1001(1)+330$.
>This gives $gcd(1331,1001)=gcd(1001,330)$. We continue:
>$1001 = 330(3)+11$.
>This gives $gcd(1331,1001)=gcd(1001,330)=gcd(330,11)$. We continue:
>$330 = 11(30)+0.$
>This gives $gcd(1331,1001)=gcd(1001,330)=gcd(330,11)=gcd(11,0)=11$.
>Thus, we have $gcd(1331,1001)=11$.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 3.2.3
>**Find $gcd(6060, 9888)$.**
>
>$$\begin{align*}
>	9888 &= 6060(1)+3828\\
>	6060 &= 3828(1)+2232\\
>	3828 &= 2232(1)+1596\\
>	2232 &= 1596(1)+636\\
>	1596 &= 636(2)+324\\
>	636 &= 324(1)+312\\
>	324 &= 312(1)+\bf{12}\\
>	312 &= \mathbf{12} (26)+0\\\\
>	gcd(6060, 9888)&=12.
>	\end{align*}$$

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 3.2.4
>**Find $gcd(12345,54321)$.**
>
>$$\begin{align*}
>	54321 &= 12345(4)+4941\\
>	12345 &= 4941(2)+2463\\
>	4941 &= 2463(2)+15\\
>	2463 &= 15(164)+\mathbf{3}\\
>	15 &= \mathbf{3}(5)+0\\\\
>	gcd(12345,54321) &= 3.
>	\end{align*}$$

We can use the Euclidean Algorithm with back substitution to find **linear combinations** and **multiplicative inverses** (which will be addressed later).

>[!INFO] Definition 3.2.3
>**Linear Combinations:** Let $d=gcd(a,b)$. There exist integers $m,n \in \mathbb{Z}$ so that $d=am+bn$.

To find linear combinations, we compute the gcd, and we use back substitution to find a linear combination using our original $a$ and $b$ values.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 3.2.5
>**Find $m,n \in \mathbb{Z}$ so that $gcd(7,26)=7m+26n$.**
>
>We start by finding the gcd: $$\begin{align*}
>	26 &= 7(3)+5\\
>	7 &= 5(1)+2\\
>	5 &= 2(2)+1\\
>	2 &= 1(2)+0\\\\
>	&gcd(7,26) = 1.
>	\end{align*}$$
>Next, we rewrite the equations in terms of $r$ to prepare for back substitution. Note that we start with the second to last equation, as we want to start with $r=gcd$. This step can often be done mentally as well: $$\begin{align*}
>	1 &= 5+2(-2)\\
>	2 &= 7+5(-1)\\
>	5 &= 26+7(-3).
>	\end{align*}$$
>Finally, we compute $m,n$ through back substitution: $$\begin{align*}
>	1 &= 5+\mathbf{2}(-2)\\
>	1 &= 5+\mathbf{(7+5(-1))}(-2)\\
>	1 &= 5+7(-2)+5(2)\\
>	1 &= \mathbf{5}(3)+7(-2)\\
>	1 &= \mathbf{(26+7(-3))}(3)+7(-2)\\
>	1 &= 26(3)+7(-9)+7(-2)\\
>	1 &= 26(\mathbf{3})+7(\mathbf{-11})
>	\end{align*}$$
>We have found our linear combination, we have $gcd(7,26)=7m+26n \Rightarrow 1=7(-11)+26(3)$. Thus, $m=-11$ and $n=3$.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 3.2.6
>**Find $m,n \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $gcd(123, 2347)=123m+2347n$.**
>
>We start by finding the gcd: $$\begin{align*}
>	2347 &= 123(19)+10\\
>	123 &= 10(12)+3\\
>	10 &= 3(3)+1\\
>	3 &= 1(3)+0\\\\
>	&gcd(123,2347)=1.
>	\end{align*}$$
>Next, rewrite equations in terms of $r$: $$\begin{align*}
>	1 &= 10+3(-3)\\
>	3 &= 123+10(-12)\\
>	10 &= 2347+123(-19).
>	\end{align*}$$
>Finally, compute $m,n$ through back substitution: $$\begin{align*}
>	1 &= 10 + 3(-3)\\
>	1 &= 10 + (123+10(-12))(-3)\\
>	1 &= 10(37) + 123(-3)\\
>	1 &= (2347+123(-19))(37) + 123(-3)\\
>	1 &= 2347(37) + 123(-706).
>	\end{align*}$$
>Thus, $m=-706$ and $n=37$.

>[!ABSTRACT] Theorem
>**Let $p \in \mathbb{Z_{\geq 1}}$. Then, $p$ is prime iff whenever $p|ab$, then $p|a$ or $p|b$ for $a,b \in \mathbb{Z}$.**
>
>We can write this logically as: $p \leftrightarrow (p|ab \rightarrow p|a \vee p|b)$.
>
>>[!EXAMPLE] Proof
>>"$\Rightarrow$" Let $p$ be a prime number and assume $p|ab$. If $p|a$, then we are done. So, assume $p \nmid a$. Since $p$ is prime, its only divisors are $1$ and $p$. As $p \nmid a$, we have $gcd(a,p)=1$. Thus, there exists $m,n \in \mathbb{Z}$ so that $1=pm+an$. If we multiply both sides by $b$, we have $b=pbm+abn$. Clearly, $p|pbm$, and since $p|ab$, $p|abn$. Thus, $p|(pbm+abn)$, i.e., $p|b$.
>>"$\Leftarrow$" Now, assume that whenever $p|ab$, then $p|a$ or $p|b$. Assume $p$ is not prime, i.e., there exist $m,n \in \mathbb{Z}$ with $1<m<p$ and $1<n<p$ so that $p=mn$. We have $p|mn$, so $p|m$ or $p|n$ (by our above assumption). This is a contradiction, as $1<m<p$ and $1<n<p$ mean that $p \nmid m$ and $p \nmid n$. Thus, $p$ must be prime. $\square$



