## Binary Relations
>[!INFO] Definition 4.1.1
>**Binary Relation:** Let $A,B$ be sets. A **binary relation** from $A$ to $B$ is a subset of $A \times B$.
>
>Often denoted as $R$, where $R \subseteq A \times B$.

For example, let $A=\{\text{students in this class}\},\ B=\{A,B,C,D,F\}$. An example of a binary relation from $A$ to $B$ is: $\{(a,b):\ a \in A \text{ student},\ b=\text{student's final grade}\}$.

A general, more common example can be seen if we let $f:\ A \rightarrow B$, where $\{(a, f(a):\ a \in A\}$.

>[!TIP] If $(a,b) \in R$, we write $aRb$ and say "$a$ is related to $b$".

### Relation on $A$
>[!INFO] Definition 4.1.2
>**Relation on $A$:** A **relation on $A$** is a binary relation from $A$ to $A$.

>[!QUESTION] How many possible relations are there on $A$?
>If we let $A$ be a set of size $n$, we want to know how many subsets there are for $A \times A$. From the following explanation and proof, we will find that there are $2^{n^{2}}$ relations on A.
>
>>[!EXAMPLE] Explanation and Proof
>>If $B$ is a set of size $m$, how many subsets are there?
>>$B=\{b\} \rightarrow \{\emptyset, \{b\}\}: 2$
>>$B=\{b,c\} \rightarrow \{\emptyset, \{b\}, \{c\}, \{b,c\}\}: 4$
>>We can conjecture that there are $\#\mathcal{P}(B)=2^{\#B}$ subsets.
>>
>>*Induction Hypothesis:* Assume if $C$ is a set of size $k$, then $C$ has $2^k$ subsets. Let $D$ be a set of size $k+1$, and say $D=\{d_{1},d_{2},\dots,d_{k+1}\}=\{d_{1},d_{2},\dots,d_{k}\} \cup \{d_{k+1}\}$. Subsets of $C$ can be written as $C_{1}, C_{2}, \dots, C_{2^{k}}$, which are all subsets of $D$ without $d_{k+1}$. The subsets $C_{1} \cup \{d_{k+1}\}, \dots, C_{2^{k}} \cup \{d_{k+1}\}$ are all subsets with $d_{k+1}$. We have $2 \cdot 2^{k}$ subsets of $D$, i.e., $2^{k+1}$ subsets of $D$.
>
>Thus, $\#(A \times A)=n^{2}$, so there are $2^{n^{2}}$ relations on A.

For example, let $A = \mathbb{Z}$ and $n \in \mathbb{Z}_{>1}$. Define $R$ on $\mathbb{Z}$ by $R=\{(a,b)\in \mathbb{Z} \times \mathbb{Z}:\ a \equiv b \pmod{n}\}$. If $n=5$, then $(6,1)$ and $(2,7) \in R$, but $(6,2) \notin R$.

## Properties
### Reflexive
>[!INFO] Definition 4.1.3
>**Reflexive:** A relation $R$ on $A$ is **reflective** if $(a,a) \in R$ for every $a \in A$

For example, we find the that the relation $R=\{(a,b)\in \mathbb{Z} \times \mathbb{Z}:\ a \equiv b \pmod{n}\}$ is **reflexive** because $(a,a) \in R$ is always true, as $a \equiv a \pmod{n}$ for all $a$.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 4.1.1
>**Let $A = \mathbb{R}$. Are the following reflexive?**
>
>1. $R=\{(a,b):\ a \leq b\}$.
>	- This is reflexive, as $a \leq a$ is always true.
>2. $R=\{(a,b):\ a < b\}$.
>	- This is *not* reflexive, as $a < a$ is never true.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 4.1.2
>**Let $A=\mathbb{Z}$ and $R=\{(a,b):\ a|b\}$. Is $R$ reflexive?**
>
>$R$ is reflexive *only if* we restrict $A=\mathbb{Z} \setminus \{0\}$, as $a$ always divides itself, except for $0$.

### Symmetric
>[!INFO] Definition 4.1.4
>**Symmetric:** A relation $R$ on $A$ is **symmetric** if $(b,a) \in R$ whenever $(a,b) \in R$.
>
>In other words, $aRb \Rightarrow bRa$.

For example, we can examine $R=\{(a,b) \in \mathbb{Z}^{2}:\ a \equiv b \pmod{n}\}$ with $n \in \mathbb{Z}_{>1}$. From before, we know that this is a reflexive relation. We can see that this is also symmetric: If $a \equiv b \pmod{n}$, then for some $k \in \mathbb{Z}$, we have $a-b=nk$, which can be rewritten as $b-a=n(-k)$, so $n|(b-a)$, i.e., $b \equiv a \pmod{n}$. Thus, this is a symmetric relation.

### Antisymmetric
>[!INFO] Definition 4.1.5
>**Antisymmetric:** A relation $R$ on $A$ is **antisymmetric** if whenever $aRb$ and $bRa$, then $a=b$.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 4.1.3
>**Let $R=\{a,b) \in \mathbb{Z}^{2}:\ a|b\}$. Is $R$ symmetric? Is $R$ antisymmetric?**
>
>- $R$ is *not* symmetric. We know that $2|4$, so $2R4$ is true. However, $4 \nmid 2$, so $4$ is not related to $2$, and therefore $R$ is not symmetric.
>- $R$ is *not* antisymmetric. We have $2|(-2)$ and $(-2)|2$, but $2 \neq -2$.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 4.1.4
>**Are the following relations symmetric and/or antisymmetric?**
>
>1. $R=\{(a,b) \in \mathbb{R}^{2}:\ a \leq b\}$.
>	- $R$ is *not* symmetric, as $2 \leq 4$, but $4 \nleq 2$.
>	- $R$ is antisymmetric, because in the cases where $a \leq b$ and $b \leq a$, it must be true that $a=b$.
>2. $R=\{(a,b) \in \mathbb{R}^{2}_{>0}:\ a|b\}$.
>	- As shown in the previous example, $R$ is *not* symmetric.
>	- $R$ is antisymmetric. *Proof:* Suppose $aRb$ and $bRa$, i.e., $a|b$ and $b|a$ with $a>0$ and $b>0$. So, we have $b=ak$ and $a=bl$ for $k,l \in \mathbb{Z}_{>0}$. Thus, $b=blk$, i.e., $1=lk$. Hence, $k,l|1$ and $kl \in \mathbb{Z}_{>0}$ imply $k=l=1$, so $a=b$. $\square$

### Transitive
>[!INFO] Definition 4.1.6
>**Transitive:** A relation $R$ on $A$ is **transitive** if whenever $(a,b) \in R$ and $(b,c) \in R$, then $(a,c) \in R$.
>
>In other words, if $aRb$ and $bRc$, then $aRc$.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 4.1.5
>**Let $n \in \mathbb{Z}_{>1}$ and $R=\{(a,b) \in \mathbb{Z}^{2}:\ a \equiv b \pmod{n}\}$. Prove $R$ is transitive.**
>
>*Proof:* Let $a \equiv b \pmod{n}$ and $b \equiv c \pmod{n}$, i.e., $a-b=nk$ and $b-c=nl$ for some $k,l \in \mathbb{Z}$. Adding the two equations gives us $a-c=nk+nl=n(k+1)$. Thus, $n|(a-c)$, i.e., $a \equiv c \pmod{n}$. Therefore, $aRc$, and $R$ is transitive. $\square$

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 4.1.6
>**Let $R=\{(a,b) \in \mathbb{Z}^{2}:\ a|b\}$. Prove $R$ is transitive.**
>
>*Proof:* Let $a,b,c \in \mathbb{Z}$. Let $a|b$ and $b|c$. There exist $k,l \in \mathbb{Z}$ so that $b=ak$ and $c=bl$. So, $c=akl=a(kl)$. Thus, $a|c$, so $aRc$, and $R$ is transitive. $\square$

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 4.1.7
>**Determine if the following are transitive.**
>
>1. $R=\{(x,y) \in \mathbb{R}^{2}:\ x+y=0\}$
>	- $R$ is *not* transitive. If $a=1,b=-1,c=1$, we have $a+b=1+(-1)=0$ and $b+c=(-1)+1=0$. $a+c=1+1\neq 0$. Therefore, $R$ is not transitive.
>2. $R=\{(x,y) \in \mathbb{Z}^{2}:\ x=1\ or\ y=1\}$
>	- $R$ is *not* transitive. If $a$ is $0$, $b$ is $1$, and $c$ is $0$, then $aRb$ and $bRc$ are true, but $aRc$ is false. Therefore, $R$ is not transitive.

