## Equivalence
>[!INFO] Definition 4.2.1
>**Equivalence Relation:** A relation $R$ on $A$ is an **equivalence relation** if it is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive.

As an overview:
- Reflexive: $aRa\ \ \forall a \in A$.
- Symmetric: if $aRb$, then $bRa$.
- Transitive: if $aRb$ and $bRc$, then $aRc$.

>[!INFO] Definition 4.2.2
>**Equivalent:** Given $A$ and $R$ with $R$ an equivalence relation, if $aRb$, then $a$ is **equivalent** to $b$.
>
>Denoted $a \sim b$.

For example, for $n \in \mathbb{Z}_{>1}$, $R=\{(a,b) \in \mathbb{Z}^{2}:\ a \equiv b \pmod{n}\}$ is an equivalence relation, as it is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive. In other words, $a \sim b$ iff $a \equiv b \pmod{n}$.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 4.2.1
>**Let $R$ be a relation on $\mathbb{R}$ given by $aRb$ iff $a-b \in \mathbb{Z}$. Is $R$ an equivalence relation?**
>
>*Reflexive:* We have $aRa$, which means $a-a \in \mathbb{Z}$, i.e., $0 \in \mathbb{Z}$, which is true. Thus, $R$ is reflexive.
>*Symmetric:* We have $a-b \in \mathbb{Z}$, so $a-b = n$ for $n \in \mathbb{Z}$.  We have $b-a=-n\in \mathbb{Z}$, so $R$ is symmetric.
>*Transitive:* We have $a-b=m$ and $b-c=n$ for some $m,n \in \mathbb{Z}$. By adding the equations, we find $a-c=m+n\in \mathbb{Z}$, so $R$ is transitive.
>
>Because we have shown $R$ is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive, $R$ is an equivalence relation.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 4.2.2
>**Define $R$ on $\mathbb{Z}$ by $aRb$ iff $a=\pm b$. Is $R$ an equivalence relation?**
>
>*Reflexive:* We have $a=\pm a$, which is true.
>*Symmetric:* Suppose $aRb$, i.e., $a=\pm b$. Examine $bRa$, i.e., $b=\pm a$. This is true.
>*Transitive:* Suppose $aRb$ and $bRc$, i.e., $a=\pm b$ and $b=\pm c$. Observe that $a=\pm c$, so this is true.
>
>Because we have shown $R$ is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive, $R$ is an equivalence relation.

## Equivalence Classes
>[!INFO] Definition 4.2.3
>**Equivalence Class:** Let $R$ be an equivalence relation on $A$. The set of all elements equivalent to $a \in A$ is the **equivalence class** of $a$.
>
>Denoted $[a]_{R}$, though sometimes the brackets are dropped.

In other words, $[a]_{R}=\{b\in R:\ aRb\}$.

For example, define $R$ on $\mathbb{Z}$ by $aRb$ iff $a=\pm b$. If we examine the equivalence class of $5$, we find $[5]_{R}=\{\pm 5\}$. On this equivalence relation $R$, for $n \in \mathbb{Z}$, $[n]_{R}=\{\pm n\}$.

>[!ABSTRACT] Aside
>**Let $R$ be any equivalence relation on set $A$. Then, $[a]_{R}$ and $[b]_{R}$ are either the same set or disjoint.**
>
>>[!EXAMPLE] Proof
>>If $[a]_{R} \cap [b]_{R} = \emptyset$, then we are done. Assume $[a]_{R} \cap [b]_{R} \neq \emptyset$. Let $c \in [a]_{R} \cap [b]_{R}$, i.e., $c \sim a$ and $c \sim b$, so $a \sim b$ by transitivity. Let $d \in [a]_{R}$. Then $d \sim a$ and $a \sim b$, so $d \sim b$. Thus, $d \in [b]_{R}$. Hence, $[a]_{R} \subseteq [b]_{R}$. Let $e \in [b]_{R}$. Then $e \sim b$, so $e \sim a$ because $b \sim a$. Thus, $e \in [a]_{R}$, so $[b]_{R} \subseteq [a]_{R}$. Therefore, $[a]_{R} = [b]_{R}$. $\square$

>[!TIP] If $b \in [a]_{R}$, then $[a]_{R}=[b]_{R}$.

### Representatives
>[!INFO] Definition 4.2.4
>**Representatives:** If $b \in [a]_{R}$, $b$ is a representative of the equivalence class.

Following from the previous example, we see that $-5$ and $5$ are both representatives of $[5]_{R}$.

>[!TIP] If $R$ is an equivalence relation on $A$, then $[a]_{R}=\{b\in A:\ a \sim b\}$.

For example, let $R=\{(a,b) \in \mathbb{Z}^{2}:\ a \equiv b \pmod{5}\}$. We can see that the equivalence class $[13]_{R}=\{n\in \mathbb{Z}:\ n \equiv 13 \pmod{5}\}=\{3,8,13,18,\dots\}$. Observe $[13]_{5}=[3]_{5}=[18]_{5}=\dots$, and here we write $5$ as the subscript for the equivalence class.

>[!ABSTRACT] Claim
>**From the previous example, we claim that every integer is in $[0]_{R}, [1]_{R}, [2]_{R}, [3]_{R},\ or\ [4]_{R}$, and in only one of them.**
>
>>[!EXAMPLE] Reasoning
>>Let $n \in \mathbb{Z}$ and $n=5q+r$ for some $q,r \in \mathbb{Z}$ with $0 \leq r \leq 4$. We see that $n=5q+r$ is the same as $n \equiv r \pmod{5}$. Thus, we have $\mathbb{Z}=[0]_{R} \sqcup [1]_{R} \sqcup [2]_{R} \sqcup [3]_{R} \sqcup [4]_{R} \sqcup$, where $\sqcup$ represents the disjoint union.

### Partitions
>[!INFO] Definition 4.2.5
>**Partition:** A **partition** of a set $S$ is a collection of subsets of $S$, say $\{S_{j}\}_{j\in I}$ where:
>- $s_{j} \neq \emptyset$
>- $s_{i} \cap s_{j} = \emptyset$ if $i =j$
>- $\cup_{j\in I}S_{j}=S$

For example, if $S=\mathbb{Z}$, $S_{1}=\mathbb{E}$ (evens), and $S_{2}= \mathbb{O}$ (odds), then $\{S_{1}, S_{2}\}$ is a partition of $\mathbb{Z}$.

>[!ABSTRACT] Theorem
>**If $R$ is an equivalence relation on $A$, the set of equivalence classes form a partition of $A$.**
>
>>[!EXAMPLE] Proof
>>We are examining $\{[a]_{R}:\ a \in A\}$. We must prove 3 claims in order for this to be true:
>>
>>*Claim 1: $[a]_{R}\neq\emptyset$.* We have $a\in[a]_{R}$, so $[a]_{R}\neq\emptyset$.
>>
>>*Claim 2: $\cup_{a\in A}[a]_{R}=A$.* Note that $[a]_{R} \subseteq A$, so $\cup_{a\in A}[a]_{R} \subseteq A$. Let $a\in A$, then $a\in [a]_{R}$, so $a \in \cup_{a\in A}[a]_{R}$. Thus, $\cup_{a\in A}[a]_{R}=A$.
>>
>>*Claim 3: If $[a]_{R} \neq [b]_{R}, then [a]_{R}\cup [b]_{R} \neq \emptyset$.* This was proved in a prior example, so we know this is true. $\square$

### $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$
>[!INFO] Definition 4.2.6
>**$\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$:** If $A=\mathbb{Z}$ with $a \sim b$ iff $a \equiv b \pmod{n}$, we have $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}=\{[0]_{n}, [1]_{n}, [2]_{n}, \dots, [n-1]_{n}\}$.

For example, the equivalence relation $a \sim b$ iff $a \equiv b \pmod{3}$ has equivalence classes $[0]_{3}, [1]_{3}, \text{ and } [2]_{3}$. In this case, we are working in the set $\mathbb{Z}/3\mathbb{Z}= \{[0]_{3}, [1]_{3}, [2]_{3}\}$.

## Addition and Multiplication
### Addition of Equivalence Classes
>[!TIP] To add in $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$, $[a]_{n}+[b]_{n}=[a+b]_{n}$.

Let's look at $\mathbb{Z}/3\mathbb{Z}$:

| +         | $[0]_{3}$ | $[1]_{3}$ | $[2]_{3}$ |
| --------- | --------- | --------- | --------- |
| $[0]_{3}$ | $[0]_{3}$ | $[1]_{3}$ | $[2]_{3}$ |
| $[1]_{3}$ | $[1]_{3}$ | $[2]_{3}$ | $[0]_{3}$ |
| $[2]_{3}$ | $[2]_{3}$ | $[0]_{3}$ | $[1]_{3}$ |

Notice that $[1]_{3}+[2]_{3}=[3]_{3}=[0]_{3}$.

If we look at $\mathbb{Z}/4\mathbb{Z}$, we get a very similar table:

| +         | $[0]_{4}$ | $[1]_{4}$ | $[2]_{4}$ | $[3]_{4}$ |
| --------- | --------- | --------- | --------- | --------- |
| $[0]_{4}$ | $[0]_{4}$ | $[1]_{4}$ | $[2]_{4}$ | $[3]_{4}$ |
| $[1]_{4}$ | $[1]_{4}$ | $[2]_{4}$ | $[3]_{4}$ | $[0]_{4}$ |
| $[2]_{4}$ | $[2]_{4}$ | $[3]_{4}$ | $[0]_{4}$ | $[1]_{4}$ |
| $[3]_{4}$ | $[3]_{4}$ | $[0]_{4}$ | $[1]_{4}$ | $[2]_{4}$ |

>[!QUESTION] How does this connect to Caesar Ciphers?
>If we want to encrypt the word "OXY" with a key of $+5$, we would previously assign each letter to a number, add $5$ to it, and subtract $26$ from any number that exceeded $25$.
>
>Now, let's consider the alphabet as $\mathbb{Z}/26\mathbb{Z}=\{[0]_{n}, [1]_{n}, [2]_{n}, \dots, [25]_{n}\}$. Instead of assigning each letter in "OXY" a number, assign it an equivalence class: "OXY"$=\{[13]_{26}, [23]_{26}, [24]_{26}\}$. We find the encryption function $e:\ \mathbb{Z}/26\mathbb{Z} \rightarrow \mathbb{Z}/26\mathbb{Z}$ with a key of $+5$ to be defined by $e([a]_{26})=[a]_{26}+[5]_{26}=[a+5]_{26}$. Similarly, our decryption function $d:\ \mathbb{Z}/26\mathbb{Z} \rightarrow \mathbb{Z}/26\mathbb{Z}$ is defined by $d([b]_{26})=[b]_{26}-[5]_{26}=[b-5]_{26}=[b+21]_{26}$.
>
>While these two processes are functionally the same, using equivalence classes is more accurate (and, in a way, what we've been doing the whole time).

### Multiplication of Equivalence Classes
>[!TIP] To multiply in $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$, $[a]_{n}\cdot[b]_{n}=[a\cdot b]_{n}$.

Again, let's look at $\mathbb{Z}/3\mathbb{Z}$:

| $\cdot$   | $[0]_{3}$ | $[1]_{3}$ | $[2]_{3}$ |
| --------- | --------- | --------- | --------- |
| $[0]_{3}$ | $[0]_{3}$ | $[0]_{3}$ | $[0]_{3}$ |
| $[1]_{3}$ | $[0]_{3}$ | $[1]_{3}$ | $[2]_{3}$ |
| $[2]_{3}$ | $[0]_{3}$ | $[2]_{3}$ | $[1]_{3}$ |

Notice that $[2]_{3}\cdot[2]_{3}=[4]_{3}=[1]_{3}$.

If we look at $\mathbb{Z}/4\mathbb{Z}$, we get a similar table, but pay attention to how working in $\mathbb{Z}/4\mathbb{Z}$ differs from $\mathbb{Z}/3\mathbb{Z}$:

| $\cdot$   | $[0]_{4}$ | $[1]_{4}$ | $[2]_{4}$ | $[3]_{4}$ |
| --------- | --------- | --------- | --------- | --------- |
| $[0]_{4}$ | $[0]_{4}$ | $[0]_{4}$ | $[0]_{4}$ | $[0]_{4}$ |
| $[1]_{4}$ | $[0]_{4}$ | $[1]_{4}$ | $[2]_{4}$ | $[3]_{4}$ |
| $[2]_{4}$ | $[0]_{4}$ | $[2]_{4}$ | $[0]_{4}$ | $[2]_{4}$ |
| $[3]_{4}$ | $[0]_{4}$ | $[3]_{4}$ | $[2]_{4}$ | $[1]_{4}$ |

Multiplication and addition in $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$ are both used in **Affine Codes**, which we will see in the next section.