## Product Rule
>[!INFO] Definition 5.1.1
>**Product Rule:** Suppose a procedure can be broken down into a series of 2 tasks. If there are $n_1$ ways to do the first task, and for each of those there are $n_2$ ways of doing the second task, then there are $n_{1}n_{2}$ ways to do the procedure.

For example, if we want to find the total number of different 3-letter initials are possible, there are 26 choices per letter. There is no relation between the different letters, so we have $26 \cdot 26 \cdot 26=17576$ different ways.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 5.1.1
>**How many functions $f:\ A \rightarrow B$** are there if $|A|=m$ and $|B|=n$?
>
>For each element in $A$, there are $n$ choices of where to send it in $B$. If we look at just two elements of $A$, say $n_{1} \text{ and } n_{2}$, there are $n$ choices for $a_{1}$ and  $n$ choices for $a_{2}$, so there are $n^2$ choices for this pair. Since $A$ has $m$ elements, there are $n^m$ different functions.

>[!TIP] For sets $A,B$ where $|A|=m$ and $|B|=n$, there are $n^m$ ways to map $A$ to $B$.

In terms of sets, the product rule can be written $|A_{1} \times A_{2} \times \cdots \times A_{n}| = |A_{1}||A_{2}|\cdots|A_{n}|$.

## Sum Rule
>[!INFO] Definition 5.1.2
>**Sum Rule:** If a task can be done in either $n_{1}$ ways or in one of $n_2$ ways, where none of the set of $n_1$ ways is the same as any of the set of $n_2$ ways, there are $n_{1}+n_{2}$ ways to do the task.

For example, if there are 10 members of the math faculty and 6 members of the computer science faculty, you need to choose an adivsor from one or the other. There is no overlap between these sets, so there are $10+6=16$ choices.

In terms of sets, the sum rule says that if we have sets $A_{1},A_{2},\dots,A_{n}$ with $A_{j}$ pairwise disjoint sets, then $|A_{1} \cup A_{2} \cup \dots \cup A_{n}| = |A_{1}|+|A_{2}|+\dots+|A_{n}|$.

## Subtraction Rule
>[!INFO] Definition 5.1.3
>**Subtraction Rule:** If a task can be done in $n_{1}$ or $n_{2}$ ways, then the task can be done in $n_{1}+n_{2}-\text{(overlap)}$ ways.
>
>Also called the **inclusion-exclusion rule**.

In terms of sets, the subtraction rule is $|A_{1} \cup A_{2}| = |A_{1}|+|A_{2}|-|A_{1}\cap A_{2}|$.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 5.1.2
>**How many bit strings of length $10_{ten}$ either begin with three $0$s or end with two $0$s?**
>
>Let $A_{1}$ be the collection of bit strings beginning with three $0$s; there are $2^{7}$ of these, because the last 7 places can be anything. Let $A_{2}$ be the collection of bit strings ending with two $0$s; there are $2^8$ of these, because the first 8 places can be anything. The overlap of these sets is $A_{1} \cap A_{2}$, which is all of the bit strings that both start with three $0$s and end with two $0$s; there are $2^5$ of these, as the middle 5 digits can be anything. Thus, we have $2^{7}+2^{8}-2^{5}=352$ bit strings.


## Pigeonhole Principle
I was absent the day that this was covered, and more detailed notes can be found in Nick Novak's [[counting.pdf|counting notes]]. Here is a very brief overview.

>[!INFO] Definition 5.1.4
>**The Pigeonhole Principle:** If we have 4 pigeons and 3 pigeonholes, the **Pigeonhole Principle** states that at least one hole must contain more than one pigeon. In other words, if we have $m$ objects and $n$ spots and $m > n$, then at least one spot must contain more than one object.
>
>This can be generalized: If there are $N$ objects contained in $K$ boxes, there is at last one box containing at least $\lceil\frac{N}{K}\rceil$ objects.

## More Examples

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 5.1.3
>**How many bit strings of length $n$ start and end with 1?**
>
>If there are $n$ bits, and the first and last bit are $1$, then there are $n-2$ bits in between that we care about. Thus, there are $2^{n-2}$ bit strings.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 5.1.4
>**How many bit strings of length 6 or less are there (not counting the empty string)?**
>
>Total $= 2^{1}+2^{2}+2^{3}+2^{4}+2^{5}+2^{6}=2(1+2^{2}+2^{3}+2^{4}+2^{5})=2\left(\frac{1-2^{6}}{1-2}\right)=2^{7}-2$.
>
>(Using a geometric series here to find the sum)

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 5.1.5
>**How many positive integers between $100$ and $999$, inclusive, satisfy the following?**
>
>1. Are divisible by 7?
>	- If we take $n=7k$, how many $k$ satisfy $100 \leq 7k \leq 999$? We have $100 = 7(14)+2$ and $999=7(142)+5$, so we have: $$\begin{align*}
>	7(14) < 100 < 7(15) < &\cdots < 7(141) < 7(142) < 999\\
>	15 < &k < 142
>	\end{align*}$$ So, $\#=142-15+1=\mathbf{128}$.
>2. Have the same three digits?
>	- $\#\{111,222,333,444,555,666,777,888,999\}=\mathbf{9}$.
>3. Are divisible by 3 or 4?
>	- We have $A_{3}=\{n:\ 3|n \text{ and } 100\leq n\leq 999\}$ and $A_{4}=\{n:\ 4|n \text{ and } 100\leq n\leq 999\}$. We need to subtract the overlap to avoid counting twice, so we have $(A_{3}\cap A_{4})=A_{12}=\{n:\ 12|n \text{ and } 100\leq n\leq 999\}$.
>	- For $A_{3}$: $$\begin{align*}
>	100 \leq 3&k \leq 999\\
>	34 \leq &k \leq 333,
>	\end{align*}$$ We have $\#A_{3}=300$.
>	- For $A_{4}$: $$\begin{align*}
>	100 \leq 4&k \leq 999\\
>	25 \leq &k \leq 249,
>	\end{align*}$$ We have $\#A_{4}=225$.
>	- For $A_{12}$: $$\begin{align*}
>	100 \leq 12&k \leq 999\\
>	9 \leq &k \leq 83,
>	\end{align*}$$ We have $\#A_{12}=75$.
>	- Our final answer is $\#(A_{3} \cup A_{4})-\#A_{12}=300+225-75=\mathbf{450}$.
>4. Are not divisible by 4?
>	- Divisible by 4: $$\begin{align*}
>	100 \leq 4&k \leq 999\\
>	25 \leq &k \leq 249,
>	\end{align*}$$ We have $\#A_{4}=225$.
>	- Total numbers is $999-100+1=900$.
>	- Total not divisible by 4: $900-225=\mathbf{675}$
>5. Are divisible by 3 and 4?
>	- This is the same as "divisible by 12", which we found earlier: $\#A_{12}=\mathbf{75}$.
>6. Are not divisible by 3 or 4?
>	- From before, we know that 450 are divisible by 3 or 4, so the total not divisible by 3 or 4 is $900-450=\mathbf{450}$.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 5.1.6
>**How many ways can a photographer arrange for the top 6 of a graduating class including the valedictorian and the salutorian with the given criteria?**
>
>1. The valedictorian and salutorian must be next to each other.
>	- We treat them both as one "person", so we only have 5 places. There are 5 options for place 1, 4 options for place 2, etc. This gives us $5!$ positions, but we have to consider that the two can swap positions. Thus, there are $\mathbf{2(5!)}$ positions.
>2. The valedictorian and salutorian cannot be next to each other.
>	- This is the total number of placements minus the total positions in which the two are standing next to each other. This gives us $\mathbf{6!-2(5!)}$ positions.
>3. The valedictorian must be left of the salutorian.
>	- For the case $\underline{V}\ \underline{S}\ \underline{ }\ \underline{ }\ \underline{ }\ \underline{ }$, there are $4!$ positions.
>	- For the case $\underline{ }\ \underline{ }\ \underline{S}\ \underline{ }\ \underline{ }\ \underline{ }$, there are 2 choices for $V$ and 4 other spots, so there are $2\cdot 4!$ positions.
>	- For the case $\underline{ }\ \underline{ }\ \underline{ }\ \underline{S}\ \underline{ }\ \underline{ }$, there are $3\cdot 4!$ positions.
>	- Continuing this pattern, we have $4!+2(4!)+3(4!)+4(4!)+5(4!)=\mathbf{360}$.



