I was absent for some of this day as well, so some additional notes can be found in Nick Novak's [[permutations-combinations.pdf|permutations and combinations notes]].

## Permutations
>[!INFO] Definition 5.2.1
>**Permutations:** The number of ways a set can be arranged into an order. Given $n$ distinct elements, there are $n!$ **permutations**.
>
>Denoted $P(n,n)$.

This definition is only useful if we want to arrange all $n$ elements.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 5.2.1
>**How many ways can 5 people on a team be lined up?**
>
>There are 5 choices for the first position, 4 choices for the second, and so on. Thus, we have $P(5,5)=5!=120$ ways.

But what if we only want to arrange *some* elements?

>[!INFO] Definition 5.2.2
>**$r$-Permutations:** The ordered arragnement of $r$ elements of a set containing $n$ elements is called an **$r$-permutation**.
>
>The number of $r$-permutations is given by $P(n,r)=\frac{n!}{(n-r)!}$.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 5.2.2
>**If there are 10 runners and we give medals to only 3, how many ways can we give out the medals?**
>
>- There are 10 runners first, 9 runners second, and 8 runners third. This gives us $10\cdot9\cdot8=720$ ways.
>- We could also solve this as an $r$-permutation, which gives us $P(10,3)=\frac{10!}{(10-3)!}=720$.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 5.2.3
>**How many permutations of the letters $A,B,C,D,E,F,G$ contain the following?**
>
>1. The string $BCD$?
>	- Treat $BCD$ as one letter, which gives us $A,BCD,E,F,G$. There are $5!=120$ permutations.
>2. The strings $BA$ and $GF$?
>	- Grouping these strings gives us $BA,C,D,E,GF$, so there are $5!=120$ permutations.
>3. The strings $ABC$ and $CDE$?
>	- Because $C$ is in both substrings, we have to group them together. This gives us $ABCDE,F,G$, so there are $3!=6$ permutations.
>1. The string $CFGA$?
>	- Grouping this substring gives us $CFGA,B,D,E$, so there are $4!=24$ substrings.
>2. The strings $CBA$ and $BED$?
>	- There are $0$ permutations, as these substrings cannot both exist in the same string.

## Combinations
What if we want to choose $r$ out of $n$ elements, but we don't care about the order?

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 5.2.4
>**How many subsets of size 2 can be chosen from $\{a,b,c,d\}$?**
>
>Note that order doesn't matter, so $\{a,b\}=\{b,a\}$.
>
>Counting the pairs, we get $\{a,b\}, \{a,c\}, \{a,d\}, \{b,c\}, \{b,d\}, \{c,d\}$. There are 6 pairs.

From the previous example, if we *did* care about order, we would have $P(4,2)=12$. Since the size of each subset is $2$, there are $2!$ ways to order each subset. Therefore, if we don't care about the order, we divide by $2!$. In this case, to find the unordered subsets, we have $\frac{P(4,2)}{2!}$.

>[!INFO] Definition 5.2.3
>**Combinations:** The number of ways a subset $r$ of $n$ elements can be arranged without considering the order is given by $C(n,r)=\frac{P(n,r)}{r!}=\frac{n!}{(n-r)!r!}$.
>
>This is commonly denoted ${n \choose r}$, and read as "$n$ choose $r$".

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 5.2.5
>**How many subsets with 2 or fewer elements does a set of 100 elements have?**
>
>${100 \choose 2} + {100 \choose 1} + {100 \choose 0}=\frac{100!}{98!2!}+\frac{100!}{99!1!}+\frac{100!}{100!0!}=\frac{100\cdot99}{2}+100+1=5051$ subsets.
>
>**How many subsets with 2 or more elements does a set of 100 elements have?**
>
>We can use the previous result to find $2^{100}-5051$ subsets, or we can take the summation $\sum_{j=3}^{100}{100 \choose j}$ to find the same result.

### Poker Hands
The following examples all involve poker hands. There are $52$ cards in the **deck**, which consist of $4$ **suits** and $13$ **face values**. A **hand** consists of $5$ unordered cards.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 5.2.6
>**In a deck of 52 cards, how many different 5-card hands are there?**
>
>${52 \choose 5}=\frac{52!}{(52-5)!5!}=2598960$.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 5.2.7
>**How many hands in poker have four of a kind?**
>
>A four of a kind consists of 4 cards of the same face value with differing suits, which gives ${13 \choose 1}\cdot {4 \choose 4}$. We also need to choose the fifth card, which gives ${12 \choose 1} \cdot {4 \choose 1}$, as it must be of a different face value, but the suit does not matter.
>
>Putting it all together, we have ${13 \choose 1}\cdot {4 \choose 4} \cdot {12 \choose 1} \cdot {4 \choose 1}=624$ hands.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 5.2.8
>**How many hands have a full house?**
>
>This is the same as asking how many hands contain a three of a kind and a two of a kind. For the three of a kind, we have ${13 \choose 1}\cdot {4 \choose 3}$, and for the two of a kind, we have ${12 \choose 1}\cdot {4 \choose 2}$.
>
>Combining these gives us ${13 \choose 1}\cdot {4 \choose 3} \cdot {12 \choose 1}\cdot {4 \choose 2} = 3744$ hands.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 5.2.9
>**How many hands have exactly three of a kind, and nothing else?**
>
>As before, the three of a kind can be found by ${13 \choose 1}\cdot {4 \choose 3}$. The other two cards must be different face values, given by ${12 \choose 2}$, and their suits are independent, given by ${4 \choose 1}\cdot {4 \choose 1}$.
>
>Putting it all together, we have ${13 \choose 1}\cdot {4 \choose 3} \cdot {12 \choose 2} \cdot {4 \choose 1}\cdot {4 \choose 1} = 54192$ hands.

>[!EXAMPLE] Example 5.2.10
>**How many hands have exactly one pair, and nothing else?**
>
>Similar to the last problem, the pair can be found by ${13 \choose 1}\cdot {4 \choose 2}$, and the three other unique cards can be found by ${12 \choose 3}\cdot {4 \choose 1}\cdot {4 \choose 1}\cdot {4 \choose 1}$.
>
>Combining these gives us ${13 \choose 1}\cdot {4 \choose 2}\cdot {12 \choose 3}\cdot {4 \choose 1}\cdot {4 \choose 1}\cdot {4 \choose 1} = 1098240$ hands.

### Binomial Theorem
While not used again in this class, we can see how combinations are used in binomial expansions via the **binomial theorem**.

>[!ABSTRACT] Binomial Theorem
>$(x+y)^{n}=\sum_{k=0}^{n}{n \choose k}x^{k}y^{n-k}=\sum_{k=0}^{n}{n \choose k}x^{n-k}y^{k}$.

For example, $(x+y)^{4}={4 \choose 0}x^{0}y^{4}+{4 \choose 1}x^{1}y^{3}+{4 \choose 2}x^{2}y^{2}+{4 \choose 3}x^{3}y^{1}+{4 \choose 4}x^{4}y^{0}=y^{4}+4xy^{3}+6x^{2}y^{2}+4x^{3}y+x^{4}$.
